Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon everyone.
Welcome to calculus and its applications.
NOTE CONF
Let's make a start.
There's a lot of you.
NOTE CONF
As you can see, it's a big group.
We do need your quiet, folks.
NOTE CONF
Please take your seats.
Folks.
NOTE CONF
Quieten down.
Please, everyone.
NOTE CONF
Folks.
Quiet and down, please.
NOTE CONF
Please.
There's 400 of you and one of me, right?
NOTE CONF
We need your cooperation for this to work.
That includes coming in on time, please.
NOTE CONF
And using all the seats, so I appreciate.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Appreciate it.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Welcome to calculus applications.
My name is Chris Sanguine.
NOTE CONF
I'm the course organiser.
Paglia is one of the other course team.
NOTE CONF
There will be other members of the course team we
will introduce in due course.
NOTE CONF
Um, but I'm here today to just give you a
little bit.
NOTE CONF
Of course, admin and background to the course.
Um, before we before we start the course proper.
NOTE CONF
It's a big group, folks.
So thank you for your cooperation.
NOTE CONF
Welcome to cap.
I'm going to talk about four things.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to talk about the course introduction.
I'm going to talk about assessment.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to say a few a few words about
artificial intelligence and its role in assessment.
NOTE CONF
And then we're going to have a little interesting puzzle
to get us back on track so that we can
NOTE CONF
start the course.
So as this is semester two course, I am sure
NOTE CONF
by now you're all familiar with learn.
Here is the learn page for calculus and its applications.
NOTE CONF
And most of the course information is on the learn
page for this course.
NOTE CONF
So all the assessment and feedback information is on here.
It's 60% written exam 40% coursework.
NOTE CONF
All the dates are in this table.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's where to find all your coursework and deadlines.
Um I am being recorded, but I'll say it anyway.
NOTE CONF
I don't think I'm not all that big a fan
of learning, to be honest.
NOTE CONF
Um, I think anyway, so we've put most of the
course materials over here on the stack service, right?
NOTE CONF
So that includes, um, the course textbook.
Uh, let me just scroll down a little bit.
NOTE CONF
The course textbook.
The assignments which will appear in due course each week.
NOTE CONF
We have a little quiz that takes you through the
intended reading and asks you questions about the reading, right.
NOTE CONF
There will then be an assessed quiz.
There will be workshop tasks, there will be solutions, and
NOTE CONF
so on and so on.
So we have two lectures a week and we have
NOTE CONF
one 1.5 hour workshop.
So it's 80 minutes in a 1.5 hour slot basically.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's no easy way to say this, so I'll
just sort of say it.
NOTE CONF
Success in life is mostly down to consistency, right?
By which I mean, please show up every week to
NOTE CONF
as many sessions as you can and do the work.
Right.
NOTE CONF
It's that's that's just it.
That's all you have to do.
NOTE CONF
So please show up.
Take advantage of, um, the particularly the workshops.
NOTE CONF
Those are your opportunity to ask a tutor in a
small group.
NOTE CONF
I know when there's 400 of you, putting your hand
up can be a little bit intimidating.
NOTE CONF
I get that that's absolutely normal.
Um, please do ask questions in these lectures.
NOTE CONF
But nevertheless, there are those workshops.
So take advantage of all of that.
NOTE CONF
And, um, and, and and be consistent in your attendance
and your on your work.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is a 20 credit module you're doing probably
doing 60 credits this semester.
NOTE CONF
It's a full time degree.
So 10 to 12 hours of work per week on
NOTE CONF
this module.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Two hours of lectures, an hour and a half of
workshops.
NOTE CONF
That leaves you plenty of time to do the reading,
the assessed quizzes and the hand in tasks.
NOTE CONF
Right.
That's that's basically what I expect.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Assessment.
NOTE CONF
Um, I know many of you will have done Introduction
to Linear Algebra last semester will be familiar with the
NOTE CONF
online quizzes.
says.
NOTE CONF
Those of you who are not from a mass degree
and haven't used the online quizzes.
NOTE CONF
There is a practice quiz and full instructions which you
can look at, and we ask you to do a
NOTE CONF
little revision quiz, right?
So just before lunch, 100 and something, people had done
NOTE CONF
the revision quiz.
There were 98 people had finished it.
NOTE CONF
And if we look at the results, um, now.
Uh, the purple bar is the grade out of, out
NOTE CONF
of percentage.
So the average mark for the first question was 70%,
NOTE CONF
80%.
Question 637%.
NOTE CONF
Right now, what I'm asking you to are the second
thing to note about this is the orange bars, which
NOTE CONF
are called discrimination efficiency.
So this is a statistical measure of whether it's worth
NOTE CONF
our while asking you the question.
Right.
NOTE CONF
There's no point in asking questions that everyone gets right.
And there's no point asking questions that everyone gets wrong.
NOTE CONF
They're very inefficient.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we have a statistical measure of whether it's worthwhile
NOTE CONF
asking these questions.
So these questions we've battle tested these questions and they're
NOTE CONF
all very efficient.
And not all of you are getting them right.
NOTE CONF
For the first 100 people.
So what I'm asking you to do is to trust
NOTE CONF
us.
The questions might look trivial.
NOTE CONF
It might look like something you've done before, but please
trust us and engage with the material that we ask
NOTE CONF
you to do and read the feedback and learn from
it.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So that's the deal.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So that brings me on to the AI business.
NOTE CONF
What does it mean to do the question right.
That's the million dollar thing isn't it?
NOTE CONF
What does it mean to do the question?
Well, can I just ask how many of you can
NOTE CONF
solve a Rubik's Cube?
It's a group of mathematicians.
NOTE CONF
Come on.
Hands up.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And I would be very surprised if there was some.
NOTE CONF
I'd be very surprised.
From my quarter of a century of teaching, if there
NOTE CONF
wasn't somebody here who could do it in under two
minutes.
NOTE CONF
Right.
There must be somebody here can do it in under
NOTE CONF
two minutes.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
I didn't want to write.
NOTE CONF
Well.
So here's here's the kind of weird question, right?
NOTE CONF
No disrespect.
I know how much work that takes, but why?
NOTE CONF
Why why would you do that?
We know the Rubik's cubes been solved already, so why
NOTE CONF
would you learn to do it that well?
Well, that is the question, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
Right?
We know the solutions to all these calculus problems exist,
NOTE CONF
but we're still asking you to do them for a
whole bunch of reasons.
NOTE CONF
Okay?
And when I is the the I is the latest
NOTE CONF
bit of technology.
But technology has been around for a very long time.
NOTE CONF
So here is an argument that happened about 400 years
ago.
NOTE CONF
It is a preposterous course of vulgar teachers to begin
with instruments and not with sciences.
NOTE CONF
And so instead of artists to make their scholars only
doers of tricks, as it were, jugglers to the despite
NOTE CONF
of our loss of precious time in betraying the willing
and industrious wits unto ignorance and idleness.
NOTE CONF
That the use of instruments is indeed excellent.
If a man be an artist but contemptible, being set
NOTE CONF
and opposed to art.
Okay, so I'm sorry for those of you I appreciate
NOTE CONF
not everyone.
English will not be everybody's first language.
NOTE CONF
This is 400 year old English and I appreciate the
language is gendered.
NOTE CONF
We wouldn't say that now, but nevertheless, people were arguing
about technology 400 years ago.
NOTE CONF
What were they?
What were they arguing about?
NOTE CONF
This is William Uhtred.
He's an absolutely fascinating character.
NOTE CONF
He wrote the algebra textbook that Isaac Newton used to
learn his algebra from, to bring it back to calculus
NOTE CONF
for a moment.
We know that because we've got Isaac Newton's annotated copy.
NOTE CONF
He's a very important and influential teacher, and he invented
one of the first practical calculators.
NOTE CONF
Um, bringing it back to Edinburgh for a moment.
The practical calculator was based on logarithms, which we will
NOTE CONF
be studying in this course.
And before we had electronic calculators and practical calculators.
NOTE CONF
People had these, which are tables of logarithms.
Write tables of logarithms.
NOTE CONF
So this is from the mid 1700s.
This book is um, you know, 250 something years old.
NOTE CONF
And what it is, is it's tables of numbers.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So every single number in this book was calculated by
hand.
NOTE CONF
And then they picked up bits of movable type and
created the book by hand.
NOTE CONF
Right.
That's how this book was printed.
NOTE CONF
And I know it's wreckage.
I know you know it's falling apart.
NOTE CONF
That's because this book was actually used.
There's nothing more dismal and sad than a brand new
NOTE CONF
book, right?
So.
NOTE CONF
So what is the calculator that they're arguing about?
Um.
NOTE CONF
It's this.
This is the calculator they're arguing about.
NOTE CONF
This is a, um, a 1961 version.
They were still using these in the 1960s.
NOTE CONF
If you look at the photographs of the NASA space
race.
NOTE CONF
Um, the engineers have all got these on their desk,
right?
NOTE CONF
They were using these for hundreds of years.
Now, this is this is a complicated one.
NOTE CONF
This is a much easier one to demonstrate to you
guys.
NOTE CONF
Can you.
Uh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Can you guys volunteer to come up?
Can you let these guys out for a second?
NOTE CONF
It's called a slide rule, right?
And it's based on logarithms.
NOTE CONF
So this is a C last, last century when I
started teaching.
NOTE CONF
Um, we did have computers, but we didn't have beam
projectors like this.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we had to have things you could see at
NOTE CONF
the back of the lecture theatre.
Thanks.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So how does this work?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, you know, when you add logarithms, you multiply numbers,
NOTE CONF
right?
So this distance along.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
This is why I need you to hold it.
NOTE CONF
This distance along here is the logarithm of two.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And this distance along here is the logarithm of three.
And when you multiply two by three you get six.
NOTE CONF
And when you multiply four by two, you get eight.
And when you multiply five by two, you get ten.
NOTE CONF
And when you multiply six by two, you can't do
it.
NOTE CONF
So we have to come back this way.
And six by two is 12 two 7 to 14
NOTE CONF
1618.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's do three times table shall we.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's the logarithm of three, three, three and nine.
NOTE CONF
Blah blah blah.
Right.
NOTE CONF
That's how you know, when you add logarithms you multiply
the number, don't you?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this calculator and I've got my father.
NOTE CONF
So he was an engineer.
He used this as an engineer last century.
NOTE CONF
Um, you would have had a whole course as an
engineer last century.
NOTE CONF
And how to use this?
I could rattle on about this for a whole hour,
NOTE CONF
taking up my colleague's valuable time.
And your valuable time?
NOTE CONF
Uh.
The circuit.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Thanks, guys.
NOTE CONF
The circular one is good because it doesn't run out.
Yeah, you just go.
NOTE CONF
You just go round and round and round and round
and round.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, there it is.
So people have been arguing about whether we should give
NOTE CONF
you these instruments.
It is a vulgar.
NOTE CONF
It is a preposterous course of vulgar teachers, to start
with a calculator and not make you learn the principles.
NOTE CONF
That's what he's saying.
We're still having that argument now, but as far as
NOTE CONF
this course is concerned, we want you to learn the
foundations.
NOTE CONF
We want you to learn the details.
We want you to learn to solve the Rubik's Cube.
NOTE CONF
And we want you to do it well.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So why am I not worried about AI?
Well, you have to understand the stuff to be able
NOTE CONF
to interpret it.
There is a pleasure derived in doing something for yourself,
NOTE CONF
even if it's classical.
People still run 23 something miles even though they're not
NOTE CONF
trying to deliver a message anymore.
Right.
NOTE CONF
We don't run a marathon to deliver a message, do
we?
NOTE CONF
We run a marathon because there's satisfaction in doing it.
And you will get some recognition from your community for
NOTE CONF
being able to do that.
It's impressive.
NOTE CONF
And you all get that.
And whatever happens with AI.
NOTE CONF
Humans make value judgements, right?
Humans make value judgements.
NOTE CONF
And we're interested in aesthetics and beauty.
So let me give you one example of what do
NOTE CONF
I mean by aesthetics and value judgements.
If I ask you to factorise 61917364224.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, you know, you might eventually get to 144 to
the power of fifth, right?
NOTE CONF
And if you asked a calculator to take 144 to
the power of fifth, it would, you know, it would
NOTE CONF
calculate it the other way.
Agreed.
NOTE CONF
And you're all sitting there going, who cares?
I mean, so what?
NOTE CONF
Well, it turns out that 144 to the fifth is
also 27 to the fifth, 84 to the fifth, 110
NOTE CONF
to the fifth, and 133 to the fifth.
Which is at least moderately interesting, right?
NOTE CONF
I mean, maybe.
Or maybe sitting there thinking.
NOTE CONF
So what?
This is actually the subject of the world's shortest published
NOTE CONF
mathematical paper.
Counterexample to Euler's conjecture on the sums of like powers.
NOTE CONF
A direct search on the CDC 6600 computer yielded this
observation as the smallest instance in which four fifth powers
NOTE CONF
sum to a fifth power.
This is a counterexample to a conjecture of Euler that
NOTE CONF
at least n nth powers are required to sum to
an nth power.
NOTE CONF
Suddenly it's very interesting, right?
I'd be delighted if I could find a counterexample to
NOTE CONF
a conjecture of Euler.
It's suddenly, you know, the whole mathematical world is interested.
NOTE CONF
And sure, they use technology to derive this result.
Of course they did.
NOTE CONF
They used a computer search, but they made some judgements
about the value of the thing that they were calculating,
NOTE CONF
and they recognised the significance of what they'd calculated it
when it came up, right?
NOTE CONF
So please make use of technology, but do so mindfully.
And don't lose track of the fact that we expect
NOTE CONF
you to do some things yourself, right?
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So let's bring it back to calculus and I will
stop talking.
NOTE CONF
Here is, uh, we know you've all done some calculus
before.
NOTE CONF
That's one of the problems with this course, actually, because
you've all done a little bit of calculus.
NOTE CONF
So some of the stuff is going to look.
Oh, I've already done that.
NOTE CONF
So again, just trust us.
This is about constants of integration.
NOTE CONF
So is this true or false.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Yeah I mean that's basically true okay.
Except obviously it's a red herring or I wouldn't be
NOTE CONF
stood here.
So why is there more to this than meets the
NOTE CONF
eye?
Well I'm going to talk about this function.
NOTE CONF
This is the arctangent function, which is almost certainly on
your formula sheet for your high school maths exam.
NOTE CONF
Right.
The integral of one over one plus x squared is
NOTE CONF
the inverse tangent the arctangent.
Tangent.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
If I diff this is a super.
NOTE CONF
How many of you have seen WolframAlpha?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay, good.
NOTE CONF
This is a kind of desktop version of Wolfram Alpha.
So if I differentiate the arctangent, I get one over
NOTE CONF
one plus x squared.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So everyone agree with that.
So now I'm going to think about this function which
NOTE CONF
is the arctangent of three x plus one over three
minus x.
NOTE CONF
Agreed.
So how are we going to differentiate that.
NOTE CONF
Well we're going to have to do a chain rule
thing aren't we.
NOTE CONF
So the derivative of arctan of q of x would
be the derivative of q of x divided by q
NOTE CONF
squared plus one.
That's that's the that's the chain rule.
NOTE CONF
And now we want to differentiate this quotient.
So when we differentiate those things and put them together
NOTE CONF
we get this expression here.
And we've got horrible fractions within fractions.
NOTE CONF
So I'm just going to rationally simplify all that away.
And what do I get.
NOTE CONF
Oh I get back to one over one plus x
squared.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So what's going on with that.
NOTE CONF
The derivative of this is the same as the derivative
of the arctan function.
NOTE CONF
Now Descartes's principal contribution to all of mathematics was to
link algebra and geometry.
NOTE CONF
And in the 20th century we mostly concentrate on algebra
which then becomes calculus.
NOTE CONF
So we do a lot of stuff symbolically, but it's
really important not to lose track of those, um, geometric
NOTE CONF
roots.
So let's sketch the arctan function.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And then let's sketch that function that I just had
NOTE CONF
arctan of three x plus one over three minus x.
You know we've got this division by zero here, haven't
NOTE CONF
we?
Which is always bad.
NOTE CONF
So it's not surprising that at x equals three something
happens.
NOTE CONF
And if we then just look at the tangents by
putting points on the function.
NOTE CONF
We can see that those tangents are always parallel even
if the functions are not exactly one constant.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Because of this discontinuity, school mathematics by and large doesn't
NOTE CONF
put in all the technical detail.
We're going to look at calculus again because sometimes this
NOTE CONF
technical detail really matters.
A function is more than just the rule.
NOTE CONF
It's the range and domain, which is exactly the subject
of the this week.
NOTE CONF
So although I know many of you will have seen
this before, please pay attention to it because we're going
NOTE CONF
to see it again in a bit more detail and
with a bit more rigour.
NOTE CONF
And examples like this can be generalised, right?
We can move that discontinuity elsewhere and still have the
NOTE CONF
tangents parallel everywhere.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
I think that's quite enough for me.
NOTE CONF
Uh, good luck with the course.
I will be back in a few weeks to take.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we will be alternating weeks, and, um, there will
be moments, no doubt, on this course when you would
NOTE CONF
like to talk to people.
So if you have any practical problems with the course,
NOTE CONF
um, you want to change your workshop group or you
want to change your lecture slot.
NOTE CONF
Please stay in the lecture slot you're assigned.
Because if 800 people show up at this slot, it
NOTE CONF
won't be very comfortable.
So if you want any practical things, please email the
NOTE CONF
course Secretary Louise, if you want to talk about any
of the academic content, then I'm your first port of
NOTE CONF
call.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So I will be in every workshop slot tomorrow at
NOTE CONF
the start of the workshop slots.
We start workshops tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
Come prepared.
And if you've got questions that you need to talk
NOTE CONF
to me about, I will be available at the start
of the workshops tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
Um, does anybody have any questions for me now while
Paul is setting up?
NOTE CONF
Okay, well, good luck with the course, and I'm sure
I'll see some of you in due course.
NOTE CONF
Excellent.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
OOP.
NOTE CONF
Wait.
Okay, give me one more minute to bring up our
NOTE CONF
questions for those who have been.
Who was in Isla, um.
NOTE CONF
Last semester.
Excellent.
NOTE CONF
So this course is going to work more or less
in the same way.
NOTE CONF
We have we prepare.
Some questions that I would like you to answer.
NOTE CONF
And then we will talk about the solutions.
At the start of each lecture I will have 3
NOTE CONF
or 4 main points.
But this is not really to teach.
NOTE CONF
It's not really a lecture.
It's just to point your attention on the things that
NOTE CONF
are important in the chapter that you should have read
for the week.
NOTE CONF
So if you just bear it with me for one
second, I will bring up the questions and well, okay.
NOTE CONF
So why is my question slowed?
I seem to not be able to talk to Chrome
NOTE CONF
today.
Today we are going to look at functions and graphs.
NOTE CONF
So as Chris said, these are all things you have
been looking at since you were probably 16.
NOTE CONF
But there are so many more things that we need
to be careful about when we do this at a
NOTE CONF
more advanced level.
So today is just really a refreshing, refreshing lecture to
NOTE CONF
see what we mean by a function and how.
What is the relationship between the algebraic version and the
NOTE CONF
graph version?
What is the domain and the codomain?
NOTE CONF
So um, so let me see.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Oh, maybe that works.
Oh, I'm not sure.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Sorry, guys.
NOTE CONF
I just need to convince my Chrom that I'm not
a robot.
NOTE CONF
So I'm looking for bicycles in my, uh, in my
screen.
NOTE CONF
Uh, man.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay, so what do we want to say about functions
NOTE CONF
and graphs today?
The only two things really, that I think are really
NOTE CONF
important in, in this kind of distribution about functional graphs
is to think about what is the definition of a
NOTE CONF
function.
Not everything is a function word.
NOTE CONF
See, something is to talk about the domain and a
range of functions.
NOTE CONF
So being able to calculate domain and range.
The reason why it is important to be able to
NOTE CONF
do that is that there are things that we will
be able to do only if the two functions that
NOTE CONF
we are talking about share, for example, at least in
part, they range.
NOTE CONF
And then we want to talk very quickly about y
intercept.
NOTE CONF
I don't know why.
Well we'll see whether we have time for that.
NOTE CONF
The thing I want to draw your attention to is
that all these things you see on the board, they
NOTE CONF
are all the same mathematical objects, right?
There are all different ways of thinking about functions.
NOTE CONF
We have the algebraic representation which is x plus one.
We have the graph.
NOTE CONF
We have the set of ordered pairs.
That is a way of thinking about function.
NOTE CONF
That tells me that this is the set of elements.
And in this set that is the point minus one
NOTE CONF
zero, the .01.
And we talk about ordered pairs, because of course it
NOTE CONF
is important to know which one is the first one.
The first one represent the x coordinate and the second
NOTE CONF
one represents the y coordinate.
It is very important that you learn how to go
NOTE CONF
from one representation to the other, not just for the
idea of functions, but a lot of the mathematical objects
NOTE CONF
that we will see in carp are represented by different
weights.
NOTE CONF
And it's then important to be able to go from
one to the other.
NOTE CONF
So because I know that this system doesn't this wow,
look at that.
NOTE CONF
Because I know that this system doesn't display picture particularly
well.
NOTE CONF
That's the text of the question.
And I know that a lot of you are already
NOTE CONF
responding.
Can you please carry on responding?
NOTE CONF
I have only 69.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
I'll give you a minute.
I think it is a really good exercise to go
NOTE CONF
through these questions in class.
And I also think that there are more than 144
NOTE CONF
people in this room.
So.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so what do we think?
So I think we can kind of look at this
NOTE CONF
question quite quickly.
The great majority of people have voted for Falz.
NOTE CONF
This is not a function.
Why?
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
So we know that not everything is a function, right?
So in this case, for each of the x on
NOTE CONF
the x axis.
I have the correspondence of two wise.
NOTE CONF
We call this the vertical texts test sometimes, and it's
something that is useful to have.
NOTE CONF
So in my solution for this question I want to
say no, that is not a function.
NOTE CONF
So who is that object.
That's the circle right.
NOTE CONF
And that's the equation of the circle in that shape.
The the equation of the circle is not a function.
NOTE CONF
So if I want to write it in an explicit
way for the y, I would write it that way.
NOTE CONF
And I can observe that each one of that two
functions.
NOTE CONF
So these were equal to objects in plus or minus
something.
NOTE CONF
So each one of that is a function.
But together they are not because each one of that
NOTE CONF
represents one arc of the circle right.
So this is quite important we need to think about
NOTE CONF
when we look at objects.
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
But that these functions are not.
In this case, it was very easy.
NOTE CONF
We all know this is not a function, but it
will maybe be more complicated cases.
NOTE CONF
And then we really need to see what we need
to do.
NOTE CONF
Let's go next one.
So this is a function.
NOTE CONF
I want to know what is the domain of that
function.
NOTE CONF
And these are your four options.
You have them repeated there because sometimes it's not very
NOTE CONF
clear.
Okay I'll give you two minutes.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Dude, we got all that.
NOTE CONF
Oh, no, I got it.
Oh, here we go.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Basically my entire course with you guys.
NOTE CONF
So.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
It's not.
Just like.
NOTE CONF
You know, it's all good.
There you go.
NOTE CONF
Excellent.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Can we have a little bit?
A little more?
NOTE CONF
A few more votes in.
And then we'll.
NOTE CONF
We'll talk about this.
And by the way, I'm totally happy if you turn
NOTE CONF
to the person next to you and behind you and
talk about this, because this is part of the aim
NOTE CONF
of these lectures.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you're not going to hear loads from me.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I have two, 201 people voted out of 222
logged in.
NOTE CONF
Which tells me that about with less than half of
you are not logged in.
NOTE CONF
But that's all right.
This room holds 400 people.
NOTE CONF
So.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So first of all, do we think that the majority
is right?
NOTE CONF
So I would say that the majority is right.
But why is the majority right.
NOTE CONF
What is the difference between the most voted and the
second most voted.
NOTE CONF
Somebody can.
Yep.
NOTE CONF
The second most quoted answered does not include minus two.
And we want to do we want minus two.
NOTE CONF
Minus two will give us an answer.
It will give us minus one plus the square root
NOTE CONF
of zero which is zero minus one plus.
Exactly, exactly.
NOTE CONF
So we need to think when we do conversations and
thoughts about domain, we need to look at the functions
NOTE CONF
that could give us some problems.
In this case, the square root can give us some
NOTE CONF
problems because we know that in real in real analysis
or in calculus, we don't really talk to complex numbers.
NOTE CONF
So we really want the whatever is under the square
roots to be positive.
NOTE CONF
However, as our colleague was reminding us, zero is a
perfectly good number to be a subject of a square
NOTE CONF
root.
So in my in the solution of my, um, on
NOTE CONF
my question, I want to say yes.
What do I need to make sure?
NOTE CONF
I need to make sure that the item x plus
two under the square root is positive or zero, right?
NOTE CONF
And this means that this is what I'm looking for.
Be careful because this can vary.
NOTE CONF
So for example you need to you need to think
about that when you have a denominator.
NOTE CONF
So if I had one over x plus two then
obviously minus two would not be in the domain of
NOTE CONF
that function.
Because for a fraction that's not acceptable to have zero.
NOTE CONF
So once when you have you are required to look
at the At domain.
NOTE CONF
You really need to think about what are the elements
that are involved in expressing that function and think where
NOTE CONF
these elements may not be defined.
In this case, square root is not defined in negative
NOTE CONF
numbers, but it's perfectly okay on zero.
So I think that we are all kind of happy
NOTE CONF
with the domain.
It's something quite that we can we can think about.
NOTE CONF
But I want to bring your attention now on the
range.
NOTE CONF
What is the range of function?
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Let me just scroll here.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
That's the text.
So let's have maybe three minutes to solve this.
NOTE CONF
And then I will be asking, um, what do we
think is the range of a function.
NOTE CONF
How do how do we find it?
Is this the range?
NOTE CONF
Well.
This is the main.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
But, uh.
NOTE CONF
Gosh, I can't see from here.
Why?
NOTE CONF
Y y is just f equal to f of x
by convention.
NOTE CONF
Is that right?
Yep.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Oh, gosh.
NOTE CONF
Lots of words.
I think one of the definitions.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
I think there is one.
NOTE CONF
I think it's eight I think.
Oh, right.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Still a few boats coming in.
This is very exciting.
NOTE CONF
So before we, um, we reveal the answer, there seems
to be quite a lot of consensus about it.
NOTE CONF
Is there anybody that wants to volunteer a definition of
range?
NOTE CONF
So for the domain, we say that the domain is
basically the subset where the function exists.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we see in the four square roots we don't
NOTE CONF
want it negative and all this kind of stuff.
But what is the range.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
The set of all possible outputs.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
So think about domain.
NOTE CONF
You're thinking about x axis Success and range.
You're thinking.
NOTE CONF
Thinking about y axis.
Okay, so you need to have, um, rules.
NOTE CONF
Not rules, but restriction.
That's what I'm looking for on both axes.
NOTE CONF
So why do we think that's right.
And how do we calculate the range.
NOTE CONF
Let's have a look.
So when we think about calculating the range of a
NOTE CONF
function, we need to ask ourselves the question for what
value of x I can find that y such that
NOTE CONF
and this is the set of all the outputs.
So in my case I say okay.
NOTE CONF
The range of this function is contained between minus one
and infinity.
NOTE CONF
Why is that the case.
Because the domain we have seen what it is.
NOTE CONF
The square root can be the smallest number of that
square root is zero.
NOTE CONF
So the range will have to be Between minus one
and infinity.
NOTE CONF
But we cannot just stop at that point.
We need to check that for each y in that
NOTE CONF
set.
There exists an X.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we need to check basically that if I take
NOTE CONF
y greater or equal than minus one, there is an
x such that f of x is equal to that.
NOTE CONF
And we do this in this case by squaring both
sides because we have a square root.
NOTE CONF
So obviously it's not pleasant to do calculation with square
roots.
NOTE CONF
So the yeah.
What is the purpose behind using a square bracket on
NOTE CONF
the left and a regular bracket on the right.
In minus one zero where.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that is notation minus the square bracket means that
NOTE CONF
the point minus one is part of that set.
Obviously infinity is not a number so it cannot be
NOTE CONF
part of the set.
So remember this notation.
NOTE CONF
Thank you very much for the question.
Uh, talk.
NOTE CONF
So.
This notation means that both the real numbers A and
NOTE CONF
B are inside the set.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I were two to write this, this would
be the number a.
NOTE CONF
This would be the number B.
My set is all the numbers between A and b
NOTE CONF
included a and b.
We have seen in the.
NOTE CONF
When we calculated the domain or the function that we
took the number two, and that has a square bracket
NOTE CONF
to the round bracket means that these points are not
included.
NOTE CONF
So if I had, say the function one x plus
two.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, the number minus two is not part of the
range of this.
NOTE CONF
So what is the range of this function.
From minus minus infinity to plus.
NOTE CONF
Not including two.
So I would write the range of this function in
NOTE CONF
this way.
Apology for my.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is the union of the sets minus infinity
NOTE CONF
two I throw away the number two because that's not
good.
NOTE CONF
That makes my denominator of zero.
And then two.
NOTE CONF
And this is a standard notation we use when we
when we write sets okay.
NOTE CONF
So the range of this function is the first one
is a.
NOTE CONF
Let's have a look.
At the next quiz.
NOTE CONF
This.
Okay one one minute to do this.
NOTE CONF
What is the y intercept.
Oh, why is that still displaying that weight?
NOTE CONF
Oh, no, it's the red one.
It's the y intercept.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Got confused.
Thanks.
NOTE CONF
So how do I calculate y intercept?
What is the y intercept?
NOTE CONF
Somebody can volunteer me an answer.
No volunteers.
NOTE CONF
So what is the y intercept?
In general is the value of y when x is
NOTE CONF
equal to zero.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And we'll call it a y intercept because it's a
value that the function takes when x is equal to
NOTE CONF
zero.
So I think that at that point is quite easy.
NOTE CONF
One more notation confusion.
In this case this notation represents what.
NOTE CONF
In that case up on the board.
Sorry it's a point right.
NOTE CONF
I can I can Indicate points on the Cartesian plane
by ordered pairs.
NOTE CONF
This is the point.
So this is the point a.
NOTE CONF
Whilst this notation here.
Refers to a segment on the on the real line.
NOTE CONF
And this is why we really need to be precise
when we write mathematics, because occasionally we may get confused.
NOTE CONF
When we have points, we usually call them a capital
letters a equal minus one zero.
NOTE CONF
And what we have segments usually we call them.
We give them small letters names.
NOTE CONF
And this is why it's important to be precise.
So when you do your homework or you write your
NOTE CONF
mathematics or you write your assignment, don't forget to name
your mathematical objects, okay?
NOTE CONF
So you give them names.
Letters?
NOTE CONF
Not necessarily names.
But in this case, this is how.
NOTE CONF
This is the y intercept.
I think we have just time to do one more.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now this is.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is when things come together.
NOTE CONF
Now let's give it three minutes, because then we need
to go.
NOTE CONF
You.
Know?
NOTE CONF
I was like.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
My God.
NOTE CONF
Okay, again, a lot of agreement on this.
Why did I say that?
NOTE CONF
These exercises of this type is where everything comes together.
Can I do the composition of any two functions?
NOTE CONF
So can I just take two random functions.
And I will be able to write the composite function.
NOTE CONF
Is that true or false?
I can't.
NOTE CONF
Why?
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
So what about if I'm trying to compose two functions
where one exists only where the other one doesn't?
NOTE CONF
Then you don't have an output.
So we can't just go in and do the composition
NOTE CONF
of function by kind of doing the mechanical thing, which
we will see in a minute.
NOTE CONF
We really need to think about where this function exists.
How do they behave to the shared range domain and
NOTE CONF
all this kind of stuff?
Hence the picture on the board.
NOTE CONF
So how do we go around doing exercises of this
sort.
NOTE CONF
And this is also a little bit of a difference
that Chris was talking about before right I guess.
NOTE CONF
Well, I guess when I was in school, in school
in the Middle Ages, we would just go in and
NOTE CONF
put the, you know, the number in and calculate.
And then we were all happy.
NOTE CONF
This is not what we're doing here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We need to think a little bit more.
So.
NOTE CONF
What do I do?
I want to say that the domain of both functions
NOTE CONF
is minus infinity to plus infinity.
Do we agree with that?
NOTE CONF
What are my function?
I can see them.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, sure, I think so.
No one is a polynomial.
NOTE CONF
The other one is a Standard mod function.
So that's all right.
NOTE CONF
So that is not troublesome.
I need to check what happened with range.
NOTE CONF
So if the domain name is infinity plus infinity the
range will be a subset of that domain.
NOTE CONF
And then we do the calculation from before we need
to find a g of x.
NOTE CONF
That gives me the right.
So we need to make sure what is that y
NOTE CONF
exists from that function.
So what is the range of the function.
NOTE CONF
And do the calculation I did before I need to
find an x such that y g of x is
NOTE CONF
equal to that.
And in this case I get that the range of
NOTE CONF
g is -17 over four infinity.
Can you see it?
NOTE CONF
In that case again -17 over four is taken.
Obviously infinity is not because it's not the number once
NOTE CONF
I've gone in and I checked the domain in the
range.
NOTE CONF
So the shared subset which is the range and the
shared subset which is the domain, then I can go
NOTE CONF
on into the calculation, which is the calculation we know
from school.
NOTE CONF
And in order to do this calculation we know this
is all pretty straightforward.
NOTE CONF
We just compose it to function and we find the
function in.
NOTE CONF
In the last in the last item.
So this is just this.
NOTE CONF
This is just like an encouragement for you to think
a little bit more about the mathematics that you have
NOTE CONF
seen in school.
I'm sure you have seen all these things.
NOTE CONF
This is the calculation.
So when we when we will be asking you to
NOTE CONF
do exercises of the type, for example, of, of calculating
the composition of a function, it will not be enough
NOTE CONF
that you tell me or you put this instead of
the x and that's the results you get out.
NOTE CONF
So you really need to be precise and you really
need to be careful.
NOTE CONF
You know who are dysfunction?
What do we exist?
NOTE CONF
What is the range and what is the range of
the composite function?
NOTE CONF
In our case, that's what we got okay.
So I think it is one minute to correct one
NOTE CONF
minute or two.
I just wanted to say that before you disappear tomorrow
NOTE CONF
there are workshops.
Please come to the workshops.
NOTE CONF
I don't know what you are you are attached to,
but please come.
NOTE CONF
And also I will be putting these slides online this
evening.
NOTE CONF
Okay?
Come on.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Hi.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, I have a question.
Sure.
NOTE CONF
They said if we use the round date bracket, we
do not include that.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So if we want to find the limitation of the
NOTE CONF
function.
What do you mean?
NOTE CONF
So the function.
I know just if we want to find, uh, if
NOTE CONF
the domain of the X is, uh, it should be,
but not.
NOTE CONF
How will you find, uh, this?
Well, we will do limits later on, but that limit,
NOTE CONF
for example, may not exist.
So we we we found, we found in the limit
NOTE CONF
to not break the rule.
Uh, no, not generally, but it may.
NOTE CONF
It's very likely that it's the case that the limit.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Let me just switch this off.
That the limit doesn't exist at that point.
NOTE CONF
This is why you don't take.